(subspaces-section)=

:::{index} Vector spaces ; subspaces
:::

# Subspaces

We have seen that a {prf:ref}`vector space<vector-space-definition>` is a set, and hence we can consider studying its <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subset" target="_blank">subsets</a>. Think of the Euclidean space $\mathbb{R}^3$ (which we think of with the usual $x,y,z$-coordinates). This is a vector space, and consider the plane $p = \{(x,y,z) : x + y + z = 0\} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^3$. In fact, we can view $p$ itself as a vector space, meaning it satisfies the {prf:ref}`vector space axioms<vector-space-axioms>` A1 -- A4 and M1 -- M4, where we define addition and scalar multiplication as coming from $\mathbb{R}^3$. We saw in the chapter on [co-ordinate geometry](coordinate-geometry-chapter) that this vector space $p$ actually closely resembles $\mathbb{R}^2$.

:::{prf:definition} Subspace
:label: subspace-definition

A non-empty subset $W$ of a vector space $V$ is called a **subspace** (or a vector subspace) if it satisfies all the vector space properties A1 -- A4 and M1 -- M4.
:::

Most of the {prf:ref}`axioms<vector-space-axioms>` A1 -- A4 and M1 -- M4 are automatically satisfied, simply because they're satisfied in $V$. The only things we really need to check are that addition and scalar multiplication are well-defined. In other words we need to check that when we 'add' or 'multiply' in $W$ we are not taken outside of $W$ ({numref}`subspaces-figure`). This idea is formalised in {prf:ref}`the subspace condition<subspace-condition-theorem>`.

:::{figure} /images/subspaces.svg
:name: subspaces-figure
:width: 350

Illustration of a subspace $W$ of a vector space $V$.
:::

:::{index} Subspace condition
:::

:::{prf:theorem} Subspace condition
:label: subspace-condition-theorem

Let $V$ be a vector space over $F$ and $W$ be a non-empty subset of $V$ then $W$ is a subspace if and only if the following condition is satisfied

$$ u + \alpha w \in W,$$(subspace-condition-equation)

where $u, w \in W$ and $\alpha \in F$.
:::

To demonstrate the use of {prf:ref}`the subspace condition<subspace-condition-theorem>` let's check whether $W = \{(x, y, z)^\mathsf{T} : x + 2y - 3z = 0\}$ is a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^3$. First we need to verify that $W$ is non-empty. To do this we simply need to find an element of $W$, e.g., $\mathbf{0} \in W$ so $W$ is non-empty.

Next we need to take two arbitrary vectors in $W$, $\mathbf{u} = (u_1, u_2, u_3)^\mathsf{T}, \mathbf{v} = (v_1, v_2, v_3)^\mathsf{T} \in W$ say and a scalar $\alpha \in \mathbb{R}$ then 

$$ \mathbf{u} + \alpha \mathbf{v} =
    \begin{pmatrix} u_1 \\ u_2 \\ u_3 \end{pmatrix} + \alpha 
    \begin{pmatrix} v_1 \\ v_2 \\ v_3 \end{pmatrix} 
    = \begin{pmatrix} u_1 + \alpha v_1 \\ u_2 + \alpha v_2 \\ u_3 + \alpha v_3 \end{pmatrix}. $$

We now need to show that $(u_1 + \alpha v_1, u_2 + \alpha v_2, u_3 + \alpha v_3)^\mathsf{T}  \in W$, i.e., that $x + 2y - 3z = 0$, so since $x = u_1 + \alpha v_1$, $y = u_2 + \alpha v_2$ and $z = u_3 + \alpha v_3$ then

$$ \begin{align*}
    x + 2y - 3z &= (u_1 + \alpha v_1) + 2(u_2 + \alpha v_2) - 3(u_3 + \alpha v_3) \\
    &= (u_1 + 2u_2 - 3u_3) + \alpha (v_1 + 2v_2 - 3v_3) \\
    &= 0 + \alpha \cdot 0 = 0,
\end{align*} $$

therefore $\mathbf{u} + \alpha \mathbf{v} \in W$ and $W$ is a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^3$

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GubzENhwfAs?si=c0uMY2cjhtKNIL_V" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

::::{prf:example}
:label: subspace-example

(i) &emsp; Let $W$ be the subset $M_{2\times 2}$ given by

$$ \begin{align*}
    W = \left\{ \begin{pmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{pmatrix} : a + b + c + d = 0 \right\}.
\end{align*} $$

Show that $W$ is a subspace of $M_{2\times 2}$.

:::{dropdown} Solution (click to show)

Clearly $\mathbf{0}_{2\times 2} \in W$ so $W$ is non-empty. Let $U, V \in W$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{R}$. Then 

$$ \begin{align*}
    U + \alpha V = 
    \begin{pmatrix} u_{11} & u_{12} \\ u_{21} & u_{22} \end{pmatrix} + \alpha
    \begin{pmatrix} v_{11} & v_{12} \\ v_{21} & v_{22} \end{pmatrix} = 
    \begin{pmatrix} 
        u_{11} + \alpha v_{11} & u_{12} + \alpha v_{12} \\ 
        u_{21} + \alpha v_{21} & u_{22} + \alpha v_{22} 
    \end{pmatrix}.
\end{align*} $$

Checking that $U + \alpha V \in W$

$$ \begin{align*}
    a + b + c + d &= (u_{11} + \alpha v_{11}) + (u_{12} + \alpha v_{12}) + (u_{21} + \alpha v_{21}) + (u_{22} + \alpha v_{22}) \\ 
    & = (u_{11} + u_{12} + u_{21} + u_{22}) + \alpha (v_{11} + v_{12} + v_{21} + v_{22}) \\
    & = 0 + \alpha \cdot 0 = 0,
\end{align*} $$
 
so $U + \alpha V \in W$ therefore $W$ is a subspace of $M_{2\times 2}$.
:::

(ii) &emsp; Let $W = \{ p(x) \in P_n(\mathbb{R}) : p(x) = p(-x)\} \subseteq P(\mathbb{R}_n)$ be the set of all even functions. Show that $W$ is a subspace of $P_n(\mathbb{R})$.

:::{dropdown} Solution (click to show)
The zero polynomial $0 \in W$ so $W$ is non-empty. Let $u, v \in W$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{R}$, we need to show that $u + \alpha v \in W$. Now we know that $u(-x) = u(x)$ and $v(-x) = v(x)$ so

$$ \begin{align*}
    (u + \alpha v)(x) = u(x) + \alpha v(x) = u(-x) + \alpha v(-x) = (u + \alpha v)(-x),
\end{align*} $$

so $(u + \alpha v)(x) \in W$ is also an even function therefore $W$ is a subspace.
:::
::::

## Non-examples of Subspaces

Not all subsets of a vector space will be a subspace. For example, define $p$ as the polynomial 

$$ p=a_0 + a_1 x + a_2 x^2 + \cdots + a_n x^n = \sum_{i = 0}^n a_ix^i, $$

with $a_n\neq 0$, we say $p$ has degree $n$ and write $\operatorname{deg}(p)=n$. Let 

$$ W = \{p \in P_n(\mathbb{R}) : \operatorname{deg}(p) \in \{0,2,4\}\} $$

i.e, the set of all polynomials of even degree at most 4 together with the zero polynomial. Is $W$ a subspace of $P_4(\mathbb{R})$?

Let $u = x^2$ and $v = -x ^ 2 + x$ then $u, v \in W$ but $u + v = x^2 - x^2 + x = x \notin W$ since $\operatorname{deg}(x) = 1$ is odd. Therefore $W$ is not a subspace of $P_4(\mathbb{R})$. Here we came up with a single counter example to show that the linear combination $u + v \notin W$.

This counterexample is great but how does one come up with such a counterexample if you can't immediately think of one? If you do not see an obvious counterexample, try and construct one: we are looking for two even-degree polynomials, whose sum is not an even polynomial. Let's start at the lowest degree: $0$. The sum of two polynomials of degree $0$ is just the sum of two real numbers, so there is no counterexample here. Let's try degree $2$. Now we need to find: $u = ax^2 + bx + c$ and $v = dx^2 + ex + f$, such that $u + v$ has an odd degree. Now

$$ u + v = (a + d)x^2 + (b + e)x + (c + f) $$

has degree one when $(a + d) = 0$ and $(b + e) \neq 0$. So let's take $a = 1$, $d = -1$ and $b = 0$, $e = 1$ (we don't care about $c$ or $f$, so let's just set both to be 0). This yields $u = x^2$ and $v = -x^2 + x$, which was our counterexample.

If we try constructing a counterexample and but fail, then it might mean that either a counterexample is not easy to find or the statement is actually true. With a lot of pure maths research, mathematicians are often in this situation, trying to find a counterexample or a proof, not knowing which one it should be.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GubzENhwfAs?si=x4-OMP5EmTNTdC_a&amp;start=156" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

::::{prf:example}
:label: non-subspace-example

Show that the following are not subspaces:

(i) &emsp; $W = \{z = (a+bi) : a + b = 5\} \subseteq \mathbb{C}$;

:::{dropdown} Solution (click to show)
Here $0 \notin W$ so $W$ is not a subspace.
:::

(ii) &emsp; $W = \{z = (a + bi) : a^2 + b^2 < 0\} \subseteq \mathbb{C}$;

:::{dropdown} Solution (click to show)
$W$ is the empty set since $a^2 + b^2 \geq 0$ for all $a, b \in \mathbb{R}$. Hence $W$ is not a subspace.
:::

(iii) &emsp; $W = \{(x,y,z)^\mathsf{T} : x + y + z = 5\} \subseteq{\mathbb{R}^3}$.

:::{dropdown} Solution (click to show)
Let $\mathbf{u} = (1, 2, 2)^\mathsf{T} \in W$ and $\mathbf{v} = (2, 1, 2)^\mathsf{T} \in W$, then $\mathbf{u} + \mathbf{v} = (3, 3, 4) \notin W$. We could've also just noted that $\mathbf{0} \notin W$.
:::
::::