# Mathematical preliminaries

It is assumed that readers are familiar with the following.

---

## Sets of numbers

Numbers are classified into different sets based on their properties.

| Type | Symbol | Explanation | Example |
|:--|:--:|:--|:--|
| Natural  | $\mathbb{N}$ | Positive whole numbers | $0, 1, 2$     |
| Integer  | $\mathbb{Z}$ | All whole numbers including negatives   | $-1, 0, 1, 2$ | 
| Rational | $\mathbb{Q}$ | Numbers expressed as a fraction of two integers, $\dfrac{a}{b}$ where $b \neq 0$ | $\dfrac{1}{2}$ |
| Real     | $\mathbb{R}$ | Any number that can be expressed on a number line | $\sqrt{2}, \pi$ |
| Complex  | $\mathbb{C}$ | A real number added to a multiply of an [imaginary number](imaginary-numbers-section) | $1 + 2i$ |

The sets of numbers are related by

$$ \mathbb{N} \subset \mathbb{Z} \subset \mathbb{Q} \subset \mathbb{R} \subset \mathbb{C}. $$

(axioms-of-addition-and-multiplication-section)=

---

## Axioms of addition and multiplication

An **axiom** is a rule that we assume is true for a starting point for further reasoning and arguments. The following nine axioms apply to addition and multiplication, denoted by $+$ and $\times$ respectively, over a field $F$ (e.g., $F$ could be the set of all numbers). For every $x,y,z \in F$:

- **Commutativity of addition**: $x + y = y + x$
- **Associativity of addition**: $x + (y + z) = (x + y) + z$
- **Additive neutral element**: there exists an element $0$ such that $x + 0 = x$
- **Additive inverse**: there exists an element $-x$ such that $x + (-x) = 0$
- **Commutativity of multiplication**: $xy = yz$
- **Associativity of multiplication**: $x(yz) = (xy)z$
- **Multiplicative identity**: there exists an element $1$ such that $1 \times x = x$
- **Multiplicative inverse**: there exists an element $1/x$ such that $x \times \dfrac{1}{x} = 1$
- **Distributive law**: $x(y + z) = xy + xz$

(imaginary-numbers-section)=

---

## Imaginary numbers

The <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imaginary_number" target="_blank">imaginary number</a> is denoted by $i$ (some disciplines use $j$ to denote the imaginary number) and defined to be $i^2 = -1$. <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_number" target="_blank">Complex numbers</a> are numbers of the form $a + bi$ where $a,b\in \mathbb{R}$ and $a$ is called the **real part** and $b$ is called the **imaginary part**.

The following arithmetic operations are defined on complex numbers:

- addition: $(a + bi) + (c + di) = (a + c) + (b + d)i$;
- multiplication: $(a + bi) (c + di) = ac - bd + (ad + bc)i$;
- modulus: $|a + bi| = \sqrt{a^2 + b^2}$;
- complex conjugate: if $z = a + bi$ then the complex conjugate of $z$ is $\bar{z} = a - bi$;

---

## Summation

The <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summation" target="_blank">summuation</a> of a set of objects $a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n$ is denoted using

$$\sum_{i=1}^n a_i = a_1 + a_2 + \cdots + a_n,$$

where the uppercase Greek letter sigma $\Sigma$ denotes the summation, the lower delimiter $i=1$ indicates that the summation begins at the element $i=1$, and the upper delimiter $n$ indicates that the summation end at the element indexed $i=n$. For example,

$$ \sum_{i=1}^5 i = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = 15. $$

---

## Definitions, theorems, proofs and examples

These notes use standard constructs to present mathematical ideas.

### Definitions

A **definition** is a statement that precisely describes the meaning of a mathematical concept or term. It provides clarity and establishes a common understanding of a specific mathematical object, property, or relationship. Here definitions are presented like the following:

```{prf:definition}
:nonumber: true

A prime number is a natural number greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and itself.
```

### Theorems

A mathematical **theorem** is a statement that has been proven to be true based on a set of axioms and previously established results or assumptions. Here theorems are presented like the following:

```{prf:theorem}
:nonumber: true

There are an infinite number of primes. 
```
  
### Proofs

A mathematical **proof** is a logical argument or demonstration that establishes the truth or validity of a mathematical statement or theorem. It is a rigorous and systematic process used to justify mathematical claims and establish certainty about mathematical assertions. Here proofs are presented like the following

```{prf:proof}
Assume there are a finite number of primes $p_1, p_2, \ldots, p_n$. Let 

$$N = (p_1 \cdot p_2 \cdot \ldots \cdot p_n) + 1, $$

then either $N$ is prime or not prime.

- If $N$ is prime then since $N$ is not in the finite list of primes then this contradicts the assumption that there are a finite number of primes.
- If $N$ is not prime then it must have at least one prime factor which is not in the finite list of primes because that would leave a remainder of 1. This contradicts the assumption that there are a finite number of primes.

Since $N$ cannot be prime or not prime then the assumption that there are a finite number of primes is false so there must be an infinite number of primes.
```

### Examples

A mathematical **example** refers to an instance or case that illustrates a concept, property, or theorem in mathematics. It serves as a specific instance that helps to understand and apply mathematical ideas and principles. Here examples are used to help you understand and apply the concepts that have been covered. These are designed for you to following in class but the solutions of which are also given in a dropdown box.

````{prf:example}
:nonumber: true

Determine the prime factors of 84.

```{dropdown} Solution

Repeatedly divide 84 by the first prime number 2:

$$ \begin{align*}
    \frac{84}{2} &= 42, && \therefore \text{2 is a prime factor of 84}, \\
    \frac{42}{2} &= 21, && \therefore \text{2 is another prime factor of 84}, \\
    \frac{21}{2} &= 10.5,
\end{align*} $$

so the first two prime factors are $2$ and $2$. Repeatedly divide 21 by the next prime number 3:

$$ \begin{align*}
    \frac{21}{3} &= 7, && \therefore \text{3 is another prime factor of 84}, \\
    \frac{7}{3} &= 2.\dot{3},
\end{align*} $$

so the next prime factor of 84 is 3. The next prime number is 7 so this much be a prime factor of 84. The prime factorisation of 84 is $2 \cdot 2 \cdot 3 \cdot 7 = 84$. 
```
````
